---
title: "IT in 2022"
featured_image: "/images/refactoring/craftsman.jpg"
date: 2022-08-20T10:00:00+02:00
tags: ["TDD", "Refactoring"]
---

## Education

 - Poor approach
  - Lang syntax
  - No fundamentals


 - The first team
  - Building habits
  - Mentor (right hands)
  - Younger generation with right habits
  - What if teams require TDD from newcomers? - Adopt!

## Professionalism (need to grow up to establish)

 - Dipers
  - Big demand of devs
  - Low entrance level


 - Ego
  - More mature - bigger ego
  - Denial (for things from less experienced?)


 - Not required
  - People avoid unnecessary things
  - Why we pay tax/register cars?
  - Law enforcements?


 - Ignorance
  - Don't care
  - Lot's of new materials for free
  - Salary is guaranteed (no punishment tho)


 - Cost
  - Validate assumptions in short time
  - Easy when someone else pays the money
  - Estimations (evil, punishments)
  - Yes for invest in hype (k8s)
  - No for invest in fundamentals - sustain overtime (TDD)
  - Who's responsibility is my carrier?


 - Quality
  - Don't write any tests
  - Comfortable to ask QA for approval (blame them afterwards)
  - Better world - crap belonging to past?
  - Lack of devs hungry for quality


 - Rework
  - Vital in the IT
  - Reiteration != rework (better word?)
  - Learn from previous iteration
  - Who needs to know?
  - Exposing details invites micromanagement
  - Right at first - like taking a note

## Social Networking

 - Community
  - Is supportive
  - Should criticise and challenge
  - Teams should too


 - Hype
  - Publish what they learn (GOOD)
  - Established devs (How to survive the pushback)
  - Celebrities are taken for granted
  - Fear to challenge celebrities
  - Fancy
  - Solves my current problem


## Agile

  - No agility
  - Nonsense process
  - Ship once per sprint
  - Become lead and lead by example

## TDD

  - Misunderstood
  - No testing technique
  - No tool but skill
  - Hairdresser with blindfold
  - Skillfull procrastination (get evidence)
  - Prevents useless abstractions (premature optimization)
  - Maximize the work not done
  - Alejandro: How do you teach where to stop with fake it till you make it
  - The driving example. Need time to master
  - Writing software shouldn't be different
  - Tests later? - No
  - I'm not fun of "driving test" but I focus on unit testing... Wait, what?
